First pass at DSL documentation for test suites (#18335)
gradle/gradle: subprojects/docs/src/docs/userguide/jvm/jvm_test_suite_plugin.adoc

Each test suite has some configuration that is common across all targets of the component:

* Java version/toolchains to compile
* Java versions/toolchains to test against
* Testing framework
* Sources
* Dependencies

In the future, the dimensions specified in the test suite may imply which toolchains are used to compile and run tests.

Each test suite target has several things connected to it that are inherited from the component but can be configured separately as well:

* Dependencies
* Sources
* Java version/toolchains (read-only property)
* Testing framework (read-only property)

[[sec:jvm_test_suite_examples]]
=== Configuration Examples

Here are several examples to illustrate the configurability of the `TestingExtension`.

.Declaring an additional test suite
====
include::sample[dir="snippets/testing/test-suite-plugin/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=configure-testing-extension]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/testing/test-suite-plugin/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=configure-testing-extension]"]
====

<1> Configuration of the `TestingExtension`

> <2> Configure existing `test` suite.  This suite is automatically created for backwards compatibility.  By convention, the default `test` suite will use JUnit4.

Reviewer: Let's not refer to this as the "default test suite", but instead the "built-in test suite". I see you called this that below which is good.

I think "default" can mean different things for different people. e.g., Some people interpret the default as the only or primary way of doing things. Or some people may expect all test suites to behave like the "default test suite".

Author: OK, I made sure to clean up references to "default test suite".

// Copyright 2021 the original author or authors.
//
// Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
// you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
// You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
//      http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
// distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
// WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
// See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
// limitations under the License.

[[jvm_test_suite_plugin]]
= The JVM Test Suite Plugin

The JVM Test Suite plugin (plugin id: `jvm-test-suite`) allows for defining multiple groups of automated tests in a Java project.  These tests can be compiled once and run multiple times against various different target environments (for example, on different JVMs).

> This plugin can be used to define a group of Integration Tests, which might run much longer than unit tests and have different environmental requirements, and ought to be run against all the different JVMs which will be supported in production.

Reviewer: We need to soften this because the different JVMs/target environments is aspirational in this release. We don't yet have an easy way for someone to declare they want to run their tests with multiple JDKs.

What I would focus on is that the test suite plugin is a way to easily model new groups of tests and leave out that you will eventually be able to target multiple environments.

[[sec:jvm_test_suite_usage]]
== Usage

> This plugin is applied automatically by the `java` plugin, but can be explicitly applied if desired:

Reviewer: Hmm, I'm not sure it makes any sense to apply the jvm-test-suite plugin without anything else. I think the behavior right now might be broken without the java plugin applied.

Author: I understand, but didn't mean to imply that the plugin could be applied standalone. Let me try to reword.

.Using the JVM Test Suite plugin
====
include::sample[dir="snippets/testing/test-suite-plugin/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=apply-jvm-test-suite]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/testing/test-suite-plugin/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=apply-jvm-test-suite]"]
====

> The plugin adds a `testing` extension (type: link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.testing.base.TestingExtension.html[TestingExtension]) to the project used to configure test suites.

Reviewer: I think we should fill out a bit more here about what the built-in behavior is. Namely, I think we should say that we automatically add a test suite named "test" that is related to the test task and testXXX configurations that people may already know.

[[sec:jvm_test_suite_tasks]]
== Tasks

The JVM Test Suite plugin adds the following task to the project:

`test` — link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.tasks.testing.Test.html[Test]::
_Depends on_: `testClasses` from the `java` plugin, and all tasks which produce the test runtime classpath
+
Runs the unit tests using JUnit by default; can be configured for other frameworks.

Additional instances of link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.tasks.testing.Test.html[Test] tasks will be automatically created for each test suite added via the `testing` extension.

[[sec:jvm_test_suite_configuration]]
== Configuration

See the link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.testing.base.TestingExtension.html[TestingExtension] class in the API documentation.

[[sec:jvm_test_suite_terminology]]
=== Terminology and Modeling
The JVM Test Suite Plugin introduces some modeling concepts backed by new APIs.  Here are their definitions.

==== Test Suite ====

> Each test suite is a _component_. A component is an abstract software thing. It is the description of the software to build.

Reviewer: I think we don't need to include these details about a component just yet. This definition was more for internal use and not a user. 
To steal some inspiration from the Javadoc for JvmTestSuite:
> A test suite is a collection of JVM-based tests.

==== Dimensions ====

> Each test suite has _dimensions_, for example if it should be built/run on JDK8 or JDK15.

Reviewer: We shouldn't mention dimensions just yet. The first version of this will only have a 1:1 test suite -> test suite target relationship

==== Test Suite Target ====

> Each test suite is _realized_ from a component into a _target_. A target is an implementation of the abstract component for a particular combination of dimensions.  For the initial release of this plugin, each test suite has no configurable dimensions.  This results in a 1:1 relationship between test suite and test suite target, and a 1:1 relationship between test suite targets and a matching link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.tasks.testing.Test.html[Test] task.

Reviewer: This is a little too technical right now too. I would focus on that the test suite target defines a particular environment to run the tests, but we're limiting test suites to a single target right now with no extra configuration on which environment the test suite target runs in.

Each test suite has some configuration that is common across all targets of the component:

* Java version/toolchains to compile
* Java versions/toolchains to test against
* Testing framework
* Sources

> * Dependencies

Reviewer: The toolchains are aspirational right now.  We don't provide a way to configure it.

I think this would go well up in the test suite definition above.

In the future, the dimensions specified in the test suite may imply which toolchains are used to compile and run tests.

> 

Reviewer: We can leave a note about how we see this changing in future releases. I think that would be better called out separately vs embedded in the text of this section.

Each test suite target has several things connected to it that are inherited from the component but can be configured separately as well:

* Dependencies
* Sources
* Java version/toolchains (read-only property)
* Testing framework (read-only property)

> 

Reviewer: Nothing is configurable at the test suite target level right now, except the test task directly. The other properties are aspirational things we want to add and shouldn't be mentioned.

[[sec:jvm_test_suite_examples]]

> === Configuration Examples

Reviewer: Maybe these examples should be pulled up high enough so that they show up in the right hand side bar?

Author: I agree, but asciidoctor is giving me fits. Let's discuss offline.

> Here are several examples to illustrate the configurability of the `TestingExtension`.

Reviewer: maybe?
```suggestion
Here are several examples to illustrate the configurability of test suites.
```

.Declaring an additional test suite
====
include::sample[dir="snippets/testing/test-suite-plugin/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=configure-testing-extension]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/testing/test-suite-plugin/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=configure-testing-extension]"]
====

> <1> Configuration of the `TestingExtension`

Reviewer: Maybe <1> would make more sense on `suites` itself?

```suggestion
<1> Configuring test suites for this project
```

<2> Configure existing `test` suite.  This suite is automatically created for backwards compatibility.  By convention, the built-in `test` suite will use JUnit4.

> <3> This call tells the suite to use JUnit Platform, and automatically adds the framework dependencies.  It is not necessary to explicitly name or configure the built-in `test` suite if JUnit4 is desired.

Reviewer: I would write this in a more imperative mood. e.g., instead of saying "This call ...", we would say "Declare this test suite uses JUnit Jupiter". I think this makes it easier to understand that these are declarations vs individual method calls that build some state.

This plugin can be used to define a group of Integration Tests, which might run much longer than unit tests and have different environmental requirements.

[[sec:jvm_test_suite_usage]]
== Usage

This plugin is applied automatically by the `java` plugin, and can be additionally applied explicitly if desired:

.Using the JVM Test Suite plugin
====
include::sample[dir="snippets/testing/test-suite-plugin/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=apply-jvm-test-suite]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/testing/test-suite-plugin/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=apply-jvm-test-suite]"]
====

The plugin cannot be applied standalone as it relies on several conventions of the `java` plugin.

The plugins adds the following objects to the project:

 * A `testing` extension (type: link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.testing.base.TestingExtension.html[TestingExtension]) to the project used to configure test suites.
 * A test suite named `test` (type: link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.plugins.jvm.JvmTestSuite.html[JvmTestSuite]).
 * A `test` link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.tasks.SourceSet.html[SourceSet].

>  * Several configurations derived from the `test` SourceSet name: `testImplementation`, `testCompileOnly`, `testRuntimeOnly`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * Several configurations derived from the `test` SourceSet named: `testImplementation`, `testCompileOnly`, `testRuntimeOnly`
```

Author: I think this is correct as-is, or how about:

> Several configurations are derived from the name of the `test` SourceSet: ...

Reviewer: that's fine

>  * A single `target` backed by a task named `test`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * A single test suite target backed by a task named `test`.
```

The `test` task, SourceSet and derived configurations are identical in name and function to those used in prior Gradle releases.

[[sec:jvm_test_suite_tasks]]
== Tasks

The JVM Test Suite plugin adds the following task to the project:

`test` — link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.tasks.testing.Test.html[Test]::
_Depends on_: `testClasses` from the `java` plugin, and all tasks which produce the test runtime classpath
+

> Runs the unit tests using JUnit by default; can be configured for other frameworks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Runs the tests using JUnit by default but can be configured for other frameworks.
```

Additional instances of link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.tasks.testing.Test.html[Test] tasks will be automatically created for each test suite added via the `testing` extension.

[[sec:jvm_test_suite_configuration]]
== Configuration

See the link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.testing.base.TestingExtension.html[TestingExtension] class in the API documentation.

[[sec:jvm_test_suite_terminology]]
=== Terminology and Modeling
The JVM Test Suite Plugin introduces some modeling concepts backed by new APIs.  Here are their definitions.

==== Test Suite ====
A test suite is a collection of JVM-based tests.

==== Test Suite Target ====

> For the initial release of this plugin, each test suite has a single target.  This results in a 1:1:1 relationship between test suite, test suite target and a matching link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.tasks.testing.Test.html[Test] task.  The name of the `Test` task is derived from the suite name.  Future iterations of the plugin will allow defining multiple targets based on a `dimension`, such as a particular JDK/JRE against which to execute tests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the initial release of this plugin, each test suite has a single target.  This results in a 1:1:1 relationship between test suite, test suite target and a matching link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.tasks.testing.Test.html[Test] task.  The name of the `Test` task is derived from the suite name.  Future iterations of the plugin will allow defining multiple targets based other attributes, such as a particular JDK/JRE runtime.
```

Each test suite has some configuration that is common across for all tests contained in the suite:

* Testing framework
* Sources
* Dependencies

> In the future, the dimensions specified in the test suite may imply which toolchains are used to compile and run tests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the future, other properties may be specified in the test suite which may influence the toolchains selected to compile and run tests.
```

The `Test` task associated with the target inherits its name from the suite.  Other properties of the `Test` task are configurable.

[[sec:jvm_test_suite_examples]]
[discrete]
== Configuration Examples

Here are several examples to illustrate the configurability of test suites.

> == Declaring an additional test suite

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Declare an additional test suite
```

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/testing/test-suite-plugin/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=configure-testing-extension]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/testing/test-suite-plugin/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=configure-testing-extension]"]
====

> <1> Configure all test suites for this project

Reviewer: Just a small style comment, make sure each of these end with a period

<3> Declare this test suite uses JUnit Jupiter.  The framework's dependencies are automatically included.  It is not necessary to explicitly name or configure the built-in `test` suite if JUnit4 is desired.
<4> Define a new suite called `integrationTest`.
<5> Add a dependency on the production code of the project to the `integrationTest` suite targets.  By convention, only the built-in `test` suite will automatically have a dependency on the production code of the project.
<6> Configure all targets of this suite.  By convention, test suite targets have no relationship to other `Test` tasks.  This example shows that the slower integration test suite targets should run after all targets of the `test` suite are complete.
<7> Configure the `check` task to depend on all `integrationTest` targets.  By convention, test suite targets are not associated with the `check` task.

Invoking the `check` task on the above configured build should show output similar to:

[listing]
----
include::{snippetsPath}/testing/test-suite-plugin/tests/checkTaskOutput.out[]
----

> Note that all tasks synthesized by the registration of the `integrationTest` suite (`compileIntegrationTestJava`, `processIntegrationTestResources`, `integrationTestClasses` and `integrationTest`) do not run until after the `test` suite completes its tasks.

Reviewer: I don't believe this is true. The "shouldRunAfter" only influences the ordering of test and integrationTest. I think there's no reason that prevents processIntegrationTestResources from running before test other than we don't get the chance to check if it's ready to run first.

> == Configuring the built-in `test` suite

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Configure the built-in `test` suite
```

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/testing/test-suite-configure-default-suite/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=configure-default-suite]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/testing/test-suite-configure-default-suite/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=configure-default-suite]"]
====

> // TODO test with `./gradlew :docs:docsTest --tests "*test-suite-configure-default-suite*"`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> <1> All targets of the `test` test suite will use the TestNG framework

Reviewer: it looks like you have two <1>'s in this snippet:
https://builds.gradle.org/repository/download/Gradle_Release_Check_BuildDistributions/46323550:id/distributions/gradle-7.3-docs.zip!/gradle-7.3-20210928203627%2B0000/docs/userguide/jvm_test_suite_plugin.html#configuring_the_built_in_test_suite
```suggestion
<1> Declare the `test` test suite uses the TestNG test framework.
```

> <2> Lazily configure all targets of the suite; note the return type of `testTask` is `TaskProvider<Test>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<2> Lazily configure the test task of all targets of the suite; note the return type of `testTask` is `TaskProvider<Test>`.
```

> <3> More detailed options of the specific test framework can be configured here.  The `options` will be a subclass of `org.gradle.api.tasks.testing.TestFrameworkOptions`, in this case it is `org.gradle.api.tasks.testing.testng.TestNGOptions`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<3> Configure more detailed test framework options.  The `options` will be a subclass of `org.gradle.api.tasks.testing.TestFrameworkOptions`, in this case it is `org.gradle.api.tasks.testing.testng.TestNGOptions`
```

> == Configuring dependencies of a suite

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Configure dependencies of a test suite
```

> == Configuring dependencies of a suite

Reviewer: This is another source of confusion, I think.

Could you add a couple of sentences here that tries to avoid the confusion someone may have with:
```
dependencies {
   implementation "foo:bar:1.0"
}
```
and
```
testing {
   suites {
      test {
         dependencies {
            implementation "foo:bar:1.0"
         }
      }
   }
}
```
Not doing the same thing?

I think what we want to say is that the dependencies block within a test suite is already scoped for that test suite. Instead of having to know the global name of the configuration, test suites have a consistent name that you use in this block for declaring implementation, compileOnly and runtimeOnly dependencies.

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/testing/test-suite-configure-suite-dependencies/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=configure-suite-dependencies]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/testing/test-suite-configure-suite-dependencies/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=configure-suite-dependencies]"]
====

// TODO test with `./gradlew :docs:docsTest --tests "*test-suite-configure-suite-dependencies*"`

> <1> Configuration action for the built-in `test` suite.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<1> Configure the built-in `test` test suite.
```

> <2> Add the assertj library to the test's compile and runtime classpaths.  This is equivalent to declaring the library using the `testImplementation` configuration.  Other available configurations in the suite's `dependencies` closure are `compileOnly` and `runtimeOnly`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<2> Add the assertj library to the test suite's compile and runtime classpaths.  This is equivalent to declaring the library on the `testImplementation` configuration.  Other available configurations in the suite's `dependencies` block are `compileOnly` and `runtimeOnly`.
```

> == Configuring source directories of a suite

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Configure source directories of a test suite
```

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/testing/test-suite-configure-source-dir/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=configure-source-dir]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/testing/test-suite-configure-source-dir/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=configure-source-dir]"]
====

// TODO test with `./gradlew :docs:docsTest --tests "*test-suite-configure-source-dir*"`
<1> Declare and configure a suite named `integrationTest`.  The `SourceSet` and synthesized `Test` tasks will be based on this name.
<2> Configure the `sources` of the test suite.
<3> Configure the `java` SourceDirectorySet of the test suite.

> <4> Reset the `srcDirs` property, replacing the default `src/integrationTest/java` based on the suite name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<4> Overwrite the `srcDirs` property, replacing the conventional `src/integrationTest/java` location with `src/it/java`.
```

> == Configuring the `Test` task generated from a suite declaration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Configure the `Test` task for a test suite
```

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/testing/test-suite-configure-source-dir/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=configure-test-task]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/testing/test-suite-configure-source-dir/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=configure-test-task]"]
====

<1> Configure the `integrationTest` task created by declaring a suite of the same name.
<2> Configure the `Test` task properties.

`Test` tasks associated with a test suite target can also be configured directly, by name.  It is not necessary to configure via the test suite DSL.

== Differences between similar methods on link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.plugins.jvm.JvmTestSuite.html[JvmTestSuite] and link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.tasks.testing.Test.html[Test] task types

> Instances of JvmTestSuite have methods link:{javadocPath}org/gradle/api/plugins/jvm/JvmTestSuite.html#useJUnit[useJUnit()] and link:{javadocPath}org/gradle/api/plugins/jvm/JvmTestSuite.html#useJUnitJupiter[useJUnitJupiter()], which are similar in name to methods on the link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.tasks.testing.Test.html[Test] task type:  link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/tasks/testing/Test.html#useJUnit[useJUnit()] and link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/tasks/testing/Test.html#useJUnitPlatform[useJUnitPlatform()].  However, there are important distinctions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instances of JvmTestSuite have methods link:{javadocPath}org/gradle/api/plugins/jvm/JvmTestSuite.html#useJUnit[useJUnit()] and link:{javadocPath}org/gradle/api/plugins/jvm/JvmTestSuite.html#useJUnitJupiter[useJUnitJupiter()], which are similar in name to methods on the link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.tasks.testing.Test.html[Test] task type:  link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/tasks/testing/Test.html#useJUnit[useJUnit()] and link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/tasks/testing/Test.html#useJUnitPlatform[useJUnitPlatform()].  However, there are important differences.
```

Unlike the methods on the link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.tasks.testing.Test.html[Test] task, link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.plugins.jvm.JvmTestSuite.html[JvmTestSuite] methods perform two additional pieces of configuration:

> . link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/plugins/jvm/JvmTestSuite.html#useJUnit--[JvmTestSuite#useJUnit()] and link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/plugins/jvm/JvmTestSuite.html#useJUnitJupiter--[#useJUnitJupiter()] automatically apply the relevant testing framework libraries to the compile and runtime classpaths of the suite targets.  Note overloaded methods link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/plugins/jvm/JvmTestSuite.html#useJUnit-java.lang.String-[JvmTestSuite#useJUnit(String)] and link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/plugins/jvm/JvmTestSuite.html#useJUnitJupiter-java.lang.String-[#useJUnitJupiter(String)] allow substituting specific versions of the framework dependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/plugins/jvm/JvmTestSuite.html#useJUnit--[JvmTestSuite#useJUnit()] and link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/plugins/jvm/JvmTestSuite.html#useJUnitJupiter--[#useJUnitJupiter()] automatically apply the relevant testing framework libraries to the compile and runtime classpaths of the suite targets.  Note overloaded methods link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/plugins/jvm/JvmTestSuite.html#useJUnit-java.lang.String-[JvmTestSuite#useJUnit(String)] and link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/plugins/jvm/JvmTestSuite.html#useJUnitJupiter-java.lang.String-[#useJUnitJupiter(String)] allow you to provide specific versions of the framework dependencies.
```

. link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/plugins/jvm/JvmTestSuite.html#useJUnit--[JvmTestSuite#useJUnit()] and link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/plugins/jvm/JvmTestSuite.html#useJUnitJupiter--[#useJUnitJupiter()] automatically configure the suite targets' link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.tasks.testing.Test.html[Test] tasks to execute using the specified framework.

> Note that unlike the link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.tasks.testing.Test.html[Test] task, the aforementioned methods on link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.plugins.jvm.JvmTestSuite.html[JvmTestSuite] do not accept a closure or action for configuring the framework.  These framework configuration options can be set on the individual targets.

Reviewer: Can this link back up to the snippet section above where we configure options for TestNG?
